Let me say one more thing about Pete Rodriguez.
Yeah, we were talking about Pete Rodriguez, what a key man he is.
He is the straightest guy you can imagine.
All kinds of salespeople would come through that department, and of course, Pete was the purchasing agent, and they'd all come in there and want to give him Christmas presents.
He never accepted a Christmas present.
They wanted to take him out to lunch.
He never went out to lunch with any salesman.
And he had that task for all the years that you were a faculty member?
Long before and a good while after.
What was his official title?
Do you know?
Well, I guess he was a chemistry department purchasing agent, I think was his title.
He purchased all of the chemicals, glassware, supplies.
things of that sort, and I guess even furniture and things of that kind.
But Pete was, he's one of my favorite people.
And he, you know, little Pete, his son, had a sudden heart attack while he was playing handball a number of years ago, almost tore them apart, he and his wife.
And he said a year or so ago to me,
I'd like to see Bernie one more time.
You were mentioning that... We're going this spring.
I'm taking him back out there.
You were saying that Dr. Calloway, his illness, then you for a year were the interim, then who... That was not the first.
Bryn Oswalinski was the first acting head.
Who then became the permanent head after that?
The president.
I made a list of all the people who I needed to remember.
and Art Martell did.
Oh is that when Art comes?
Yeah.
About when was that?
He came the year after I was acting head.
I was acting head in the 1963-64 or 64-65 I believe.
How did
How did Art Martell get identified?
I identified him.
How?
Why?
That's a good story, too.
Let me go back and tell you what happened when Paul Calloway became ill and Bruno Volensky agreed to be acting head for a year.
Hubert was dean of arts and sciences at the time and
Bruno, Diodo Bruno, well, you know, he's not very tactful at times.
Nice guy, one of my favorite people, but Bruno gets himself into trouble because he says things at the wrong time in the wrong way at times, and the year he was acting head, Charlie Squire was
acting dean of science, or dean of arts and science.
I guess, I can't remember when it was changed over, but about that time.
And Bruno and Squire got it cross-purposes, and that wasn't hard to do because Squire, I found, was a very difficult person to deal with too at times.
And so,
At the end of that year, Bruno came to me and said, Tex, the administration doesn't seem to be very fast in trying to find a permanent head, but I can't do it again.
He said, I've gotten into too much trouble with Charlie Squire.
He and I, if I want something, he simply vetoes it.
doesn't even think about it, you just automatically reclose it.
And he said, I've talked to some of the other people, and I think that included Hubert, and I wish you would agree to be acting head for next year.
I said, Bruno, not what I want to do at all really isn't
And I tried to argue him out of it, and so then Hubert came over and said, we need an acting head of the chemistry department in the worst way.
We'd like for you to do it.
You will only have it for one year, I promise you, and we'll find a permanent head.
And I said, okay, I will agree to do it for one year, but no more.
It's not what I enjoy doing.
And the year I was acting head, I found out some other reasons why I didn't enjoy a day.
I like to deal with people.
I don't have any problem with that generally.
But I would get an agenda for the academic council meeting.
You know what I'm going to say, I'm sure.
It would start at two o'clock and I'd think, well, gee, there's nothing on this
list that's going to take any time.
I'll go over there and spend about
thirty minutes and be back.
God darn, I'd go over there and spend—it'd be five o'clock at least before I could get back to my office, and every time I'd be just fuming, because people like Squire would get up and harangue some subject, which was not important, really.
It wasn't going to solve anything particularly important in the university, and I'd waste three hours over there.
Anyway.
All right, then.
How, why, Martell?
I'll tell you.
I, at the, in January, a new dean of science came in.
His name was Zener, physicist.
Very fine gentleman.
I liked Zener very much.
And so fairly quickly, I went over to see him, and I said, I'm acting head of the chemistry department this year.
For one year, please start finding somebody else.
And he said, you know, that's not number one of my agenda right now.
We badly need to find some people in physics and in mathematics.
And he said, you're doing a great job over there in the chemistry department.
I said, no, I'm not.
I'm just trying to hold a fork down until a permanent head comes along.
I just don't enjoy this kind of job.
Well, you think about it, I think you'd, and he, every time I'd go over there, he'd try to talk me into becoming permanent head.
And I said, finally, time went on and it was, it was, I believe in April, March anyway.
And I went over there and I said, look, time, this academic year is about gone.
And I don't see any evidence of anybody looking for department ed.
And I'm not going to be the department ed next year.
I want to tell you this in all honesty.
I've done what I agreed to do and I'm not going to do it.
And he sat there for a little bit and he said, do you have any idea who we might get?
And I said,
All you have to do is to tell me, I have the authority to look around.
I'm not going to hire anybody.
The administration hires them, but I look, and I have contacts.
and I'll try to find somebody.
So one of the people I called was a fellow by the name of George Hammond, who was a, you know who George Hammond is?
That name rings bell.
Well, he was a very distinguished chemist in those days at California Institute of Technology, Caltech.
and he and I had become good friends.
We'd run in together, one another, frequently at national chemical meetings, and I said, George, you have any idea who might, we're looking for a permanent head of the chemistry department, you have any idea who we might contact?
And he said, well, let me think a little bit and I'll call you back.
George was one of these guys that knew all kinds of people in the chemistry profession.
And he knew what was going on in their lives and things like that in many cases.
And he finally called me back and he said, call Art Martell at IIT, Illinois Institute of Technology.
He's just getting a divorce from his wife, and I think he wants to get out of Chicago.
and he's been a good department head up there.
He knows how to be a good department head, and he might be available.
And so I gave Zener his name, and they contacted him, and that's how Art Mertel was hired.
And he showed up about the day before I took a leave of absence to spend a year at Stanford University working on an NSF project out there.
And so it worked out fine.
I finally got rid of it and Art came in.
For those of us who were observers in that era, it seemed that somehow chemistry had been designated for high priority growth and development.
I don't think there's much doubt of that, although I don't
have any details on this at all.
That's right.
But I think it's true.
I don't think there's much question that they gave Art Martell a pretty free hand to go out and build a really first-class chemistry department.
Where did the money come from, do you know?
I don't know that it came from any unusual sources.
The Welch Foundation, of course, they provide the research funds for a Welch professor, but they do not pay his salary.
And there was not a federal grant to say OK Chemistry.
No, there was not.
But let me tell you one other thing that goes back a little earlier.
I got myself in real trouble, not many years after I got here.
I got one of the first Welch grants.
I got to thank him one day.
You know, you had to be contacted by the Welch Foundation and requested to, or told that they would be willing to accept your application for a grant.
You could not, it's the only foundation I know of, you could not go to and ask for a grant.
And so I,
the uh,
Director of research of the Welch Foundation at that time was W.O.
Milligan.
I don't know whether you know W.O.
Milligan or not.
He had been made the kind of the administrator of the Welch Foundation by Doc Daugherty, who was the chairman of A&M Board of Directors, and who had been the assistant of old man Welch.
Welch had left Daugherty a million dollars
to administer this money he left.
And Doherty was a petroleum engineer who hadn't done any petroleum engineering in many years and didn't know anything about chemistry.
So he approached his brother-in-law, W.O.
Milligan at Rice.
I didn't know that relationship.
I knew him when I was a graduate student at Rice in history.
I knew who he was, Dr. Milligan.
That's the way Milligan got his job, and Milligan could be a very strange man.
When Martell got here, what was your first impression of him?
How did he go about getting his task started?
I liked Art very well in the beginning.
We got along well.
He appointed a committee of three or four people in the department to advise him and things of that sort.
We'd sit around frequently and talk about whether we should hire somebody in this area of chemistry or if he had a number of names, what we knew about him, things like that.
But after a while, Art began to go off on his own.
And when that started happening, Art and I parted company.
Art promised me things that he did not deliver and things like that.
And I believe a man, when he says he will do something, and I lose all faith in him when I found out that he doesn't live up to his promises.
And Art has the bad habit of doing this.
And so Art and I still speak to one another, but let me say this.
Art has done a good job of being an administrator in the chemistry department.
He has built up the department very, very well.
I have no problem with that.
When, by comparative
How did the A&M Chemistry Department rank when he arrived, and how does it now?
Right now, all the rankings that I have, honest rankings that I have seen, would put the A&M Chemistry Department high in the top 20.
Not number one, but rapidly overtaking a fair number of really good chemistry departments.
You know, Art did this.
He hired good people, and they came in and produced.
The Welsh professor, I can't think of his name right at the moment, he will win a Nobel Prize in the next two years.
George... It isn't George, it's Alcotton.
Alcotton.
He will win a Nobel Prize.
I was at that time dean of faculties with Calhoun.
How did A&M and Cotton link up?
Do you know?
Martell simply contacted Cotton at MIT.
To start recruiting him?
To work on persuading him to come.
Yes, and apparently it happened at a fortuitous time because something was going on at MIT that was upsetting Cotton pretty badly.
And so he became available at about that time, and he liked the idea that
that he would have a $50,000 a year Welch grant and pretty free reign on what he did.
He teaches very few courses.
He's a researcher.
He's published over 800 scientific publications.
To me, an absolutely incredible accomplishment.
And produced a lot of graduate students.
Oh, man.
He is able to do this because he has the funds to hire lots of postdocs.
Who are the other, from the national observer point of view, who would be the other high recognized chemistry faculty members here?
Oh, there's about 60 people in that department.
I need to go down a list to look at some of these, because I'd hate to overlook some of their names.
But there's a young physical chemist.
What's his name?
I hired him from Rice.
We'll get him in the first draft.
We'll leave a blank and fill that in.
Yeah, he would certainly, he's well recognized.
Let me look at the list.
We'll leave space for that.
Unplug that lapel Mac.
Okay.
I would guess.
Around 1958.
Yup.
I've been here about five years.
I had received a Welch grant and I had made the bad decision to write a couple of letters to the Welch Foundation, to Milligan, being a little bit critical of some of the way they operated.
I suggested that one of the very best things that this organization could do would be to take virtually every assistant professor kid right out of graduate school that comes in here and wants to be a professor, give him
$2,000 to get him started.
$10,000 would be even more than necessary.
$5,000 to $10,000.
Just sort of automatic.
So that the person would have a chance to show what he could really do, they'd come in
At those days, you came in here, there was nothing, you had nothing to work with.
It took you two or three years to get any kind of a research program started.
And then they had an, he didn't think much of that.
They still don't do that.
I think you're still approached by them and told that they will welcome a proposal from you, which I think is the wrong way to do it.
The other thing, they had a restriction that no matter what discoveries you may have come up with, they could not be patented.
that they become the property of everybody.
And so I wrote him another letter and said, I've worked in industry.
This isn't the way things work.
If you have a valuable contribution to society that's patentable, but it needs a little bit of developmental work or something like that, and you don't patent it,
No one's going to touch it.
It's like producing a new drug that'll cure arthritis.
Without a patent on it, everybody and his dog jumps in and makes the drug, or nobody does anything.
Oftentimes, particularly if it needs some developmental work, why spend my work, money developing this thing when everybody else is going to benefit from it?
Well, I didn't think that was a good idea either.
I shouldn't have said either one.
Some years later, I was in the American Chemical Society meeting in Chicago, and we walked out of a session of papers, and there were about 10 of us together, and Milligan was in the group, and my old biochemistry professor at the University of Texas, Roger J. Williams,
a member of the National Academy of Science, a president of the American Chemical Society, certainly one of the most distinguished biochemists of his day.
I took two or three courses from him, a real gentleman.
He had lost his Welsh grant.
I lost my Welsh grant.
I'll tell you why.
Somebody said to Milligan,
understand Dr. Williams, the University of Texas lost his Walsh grant.
Milligan says, yes.
They said, what happened?
His answer was, you don't criticize Santa Claus.
So this is the pompous type that Milligan was.
Well,
I still had my Welch grant, and we were looking for another department head.
I guess this was the time Callaway stepped down.
We had been told by the administration, we had written a letter through the ranks,
and requested that we be allowed to nominate people because we, as a group, had a lot of contacts in the area, and we received a letter back saying, yes, we'll accept your nominations and consider them, but we are the ones that do the hiring.
But fine, no problem with that.
Then some of the strangest people began showing up.
A very distinguished physical chemist from the University of Minnesota, who I knew from my days at General Mills, came down and I knew before he ever arrived that he would not be interested in the job.
He had a great job up there.
Why step down?
Some others, and then one day Callaway called me and said, there's a professor here by the name of Sidney Fox, and he would like to, you know Sidney Fox's name?
He would like to look around the chemistry department, particularly look around at our facilities.
And so, he said, will you take him around?
I said, sure.
And so, I picked up Sidney Fox from Menstellar Polytechnic Institute.
I had never heard of the man.
And as we walked around, it was very, I wasn't sure what he was there for.
But it was very obvious that he was exceedingly interested in laboratory facilities.
And finally, in our discussions, he volunteered information that I was amazed to hear, that he had been offered the job of department head
that it came with a $50,000 a year grant from the Welch Foundation and that half of his salary would be paid by the Welch Foundation.
And that last statement rung a bell.
I didn't like that at all.
And so when he left, I circled around all the faculty members and asked him, do you know Sidney Fox?
No one did.
I don't remember what area he was in, but no one knew who Sidney Foxx was or how he had been picked.
He had not been on our list.
We know whose list he's on.
Well, it turned out he was on Welch's list, I think.
I can't prove that.
I have some pretty good reason to believe it's cracked.
Anyway, this really, really upset me, and so I wrote a letter and addressed it, copies all up the line to the, declared to Doc Daugherty, who was Chairman of the Board of Directors.
I guess we simply asked, how had this man been chosen?
Because no one in the chemistry department even knew him.
And we said we were disturbed about some knowledge that we had picked up about this man and who had chosen him.
And I had reason to believe that that letter, I wanted to get to Doc Daugherty.
I had reason to believe it would never get to Doc Daugherty through channels.
I sent copies to everyone and I told Fred Jensen what I was doing.
And we simply asked the question, who's picked this man?
We got word back from Dean Dalaplan a couple of days later that said, you people over there in the chemistry department don't worry about anything like this.
The administration picks department heads and your wishes are being considered.
In other words, shut down.
And all but one other professor in the chemistry department signed this letter I wrote.
I signed it first.
Pretty obvious who wrote it, I think.
Now, was that vice president for research... Andy Suttle?
Did Andy Suttle have any part of that record?
No.
This was, Andy came along just a little after that.
Andy came along about the time I was acting head.
Tell you a story about Andy too.
Go ahead.
Anyway, I took this letter from Della playing around and I said I don't, they didn't answer a question.
I thought we asked a perfectly reasonable question.
And so I simply sat down and wrote another letter and simply said as kindly as I knew how to say it, we would appreciate an answer to our first question.
You didn't answer it.
We think we deserve an answer.
And I again went by Fred Jensen's office about
4 30 and showed him that letter and he begged me not to send it you're getting in big trouble and i said fred things i don't like what's happening and i respect your your feelings but i intend to send it so i walked right out of his office over to the academic building and dropped it in the post office over there and somebody from the president's office
Pick that thing up within five minutes because...